Brazilian Rain Forest Yields Most Diversity For Species of Trees By James Brooke 
March 30, 1993 The New York Times


BOTANISTS studying a surviving patch of the dwindling Atlantic rain forest in 
Brazil have recorded the highest known tree diversity in the world.

Packed into a two-and-one-half-acre plot, 450 different tree species were 
identified by an American-Brazilian team led Dr. W. Wayt Thomas, a researcher 
for the New York Botanical Garden.

The discovery, announced last week, displaces a previous density record of 300 
species for a similar plot set in 1986 by researchers studying the mountain 
flanks of the Andes in Peru that descend into the Amazon rain forest. By 
contrast, a similar plot in a New England forest generally contains only 10 
species.

"We were very, very surprised at the high diversity we encountered," Dr. Thomas 
said of the site, located 900 miles north of here, in Bahia State.

By contrast, South America's better known rain forest, the Amazon, has an 
average density of tree species about half that recorded at the Atlantic forest.

"The Atlantic forest is much more diverse than the Amazon forest," said Dr. 
Andre M. de Carvalho, a Brazilian botanist from Bahia who worked on the 
cataloguing project. The diversity and primitive nature of several species found 
in patches of Atlantic forest indicate that more than 500,000 years ago the 
Atlantic forest supplied many tree species to the Amazon, Dr. de Carvalho said. 
Among Most Threatened Forests

While the Atlantic rain forest is one of the world's most biologically diverse 
ecosystems, it is also one of the most threatened. According to the World 
Wildlife Fund, the world's two most endangered tropical ecosystems are the 
Atlantic rain forest in Brazil and the rain forest of Madagascar, an island off 
the coast of East Africa.

In recent decades, Brazilians' demand for farm and ranch land has radically 
slashed the Atlantic forest.

Today about 9 percent remains from a forest that at the beginning of this 
century stretched 2,500 miles down the Atlantic Coast of Brazil, covering 
425,000 square miles. In North American terms, a forest the size of Texas and 
California has dwindled to an area the size of Maine.

Brazil's oldest area of European colonization, the coastal region once blanketed 
by the Atlantic rain forest is now home to 70 percent of Brazil's population of 
155 million people.

"Conservation of the Atlantic forest is fundamental," said Dr. de Carvalho, who 
is curator of a herbarium at the Cocoa Research Center in Itabuna, Bahia. "There 
is need to protect watersheds. Water erosion has caused silting of rivers, and 
many are no longer navigable."

In addition to guaranteeing drinking water supplies for Brazil's growing coastal 
population, there are scientific arguments for preserving the Atlantic forest.

"Many plants are unknown medicinally," said Dr. Thomas, who is an associate 
curator of the botanical garden's Institute of Systematic Botany. "There are 
timber species that are untapped." 40 New Species Expected

Scientific knowledge of the Atlantic forest is so skimpy that the botanists 
expect that a full cataloguing of the Bahia plot will turn up 40 new tree 
species.

Several factors may have induced the high tree diversity found in Bahia, said 
Dr. Thomas, whose research is financed by the the John D. and Catherine T. 
MacArthur Foundation.

Located only one and a half miles from an Atlantic beach, trees at the study 
site had canopies that peaked at 80 feet, lower than the 100-foot average found 
in the Amazon. The lower canopy and a hilly terrain appear to allow for a high 
density of small trees. ï¿¼ When conducting tree surveys in the Amazon and in the 
Andes, botanists normally count trees that have diameters of four inches or more 
at chest height. In Bahia, the botanists lowered the minimum diameter to two 
inches in order to take into account the profusion of small trees.

"At four inches, we found 270 different species," said Dr. Thomas. "At two 
inches, the level of diversity explodes. It goes way off the charts."

Although different standards were used, Dr. Thomas said that Amazon and Andean 
tree densities do not approach the level he found at the Atlantic forest site. 
Concerns About Site

The team counted 2,556 total trees in the study area and 450 species in 61 
families. The three most common families represented were Myrtaceae, which 
includes eucalyptus and guava; Sapotaceae, which includes chicle, and 
Euphorbiaceae, which includes poinsettias and rubber. In the Myrtaceae family, 
92 species were identified; in the Sapotaceae family, 55 species, and in the 
Euphorbiaceae family, 41 species.

This year, the American-Brazilian team plans to study how the diverse species 
interact in such close quarters. But a nagging question remains: will the study 
plot be there when they return?

The Bahia plot is part of a privately owned 2,500-acre forest. The site, like 
most of the remaining Atlantic forest, survived only because it is hilly and 
unsuited for conventional agriculture. But recently the owners said they were 
interested in selling.

"What is happening in southern Bahia is terrifying; it has one of the highest 
rates of deforestation on the Atlantic coast," said Joao Paulo Capobianco, 
superintendent of Fundacao SOS Mata Atlantica. Dedicated to conserving the 
forest, this private group is mapping deforestation through aerial surveys.

Mr. Capobianco said that illegal deforestation in southern Bahia was so rampant 
that his group planned this week to ask Brazil's Secretary of the Environment, 
Jorge Coutinho, to order an immediate moratorium on forest cutting in the area.
